The Form of Thought Reflections on Categories of
the Temporal

Adrian Haddock, University of Stirling  

\1. It is a real pleasure to be able to offer
these reflections on Sebastian Roedl’s book, a
book I greatly admire. Careful and rich,
convincing and stimulating, lucid and deep: it is
philosophy as it should be. I have learned an
enormous amount from it, and I know that I will
continue to think about and profit from it for
many years to come.

\2. Roedl’s book describes itself as a work of
logic, in the sense of Hegel’s Science of Logic or
Husserl’s Logical Investigations, in that it is,
or at least aspires to be, "nothing but thought
reflecting upon itself, articulating what thought
as thought knows itself to be" (3).

\3. It has as its topic, not particular minds, but
the mind; not specific thinkers, but the thinker.
It seeks to describe "the form of thought in
general: what characterises thought as thought"
(19).

\4. It sees itself as thereby engaged in the very
enquiry Aristotle describes when he speaks of a
science "that investigates what is insofar as it
is and what belongs to it in itself" (22). To
describe the form of thought just is to describe
the form of what is—the form of being.

\5. That is to articulate the content of the
category, the concept which represents what it is
a concept of purely as what is thought—purely as
what is. And because the form of thought is itself
a system of forms of thought—a system of forms of
being—the category is itself a system of concepts
each associated with one of these forms. Each
category is a concept which represents what it is
a concept of purely as what figures in the
associated form.

\6. To describe such a form is to articulate
knowledge, of thought as thought, and so of being
as being, which one possesses simply in virtue of
thinking thoughts of this form.

\7. For to think just is to think a thought
bearing such a form, and so to possess such
knowledge—pure knowledge. To "think" but not to
think a thought bearing such a form—to "think" but
not to possess pure knowledge—is not to think.
Thought, considered as such, is pure
knowledge—pure knowledge of thought, and so, pure
knowledge of being.


I "The outsider"

\8. This is a vision as beautiful as it is simple.
But there is a serpent in the grass.

\9. There is a sceptic who doubts that the form of
thought is the form of being. Their suspicion is
that what we think, precisely because it is what
we think, fails to be an apprehension of what is.

\10. McDowell writes: "Of course thought can be
distanced from the world by being false, but there
is no distance from the world implicit in the very
idea of thought". That is precisely what this
sceptic doubts.

\11. Their suspicion is not that we can think
falsely and thereby fail to apprehend what is, but
that we fail to apprehend what is because what we
do is think.

\12. Consider predicative thought. It articulates
into things (objects) and their determinations
(properties). These concepts of thing and
determination are categories—pure concepts. In
thinking such thoughts we possess pure knowledge
that thought articulates in this way.

\13. Moreover, in thinking such thoughts, we
possess pure knowledge that reality articulates in
this way—if the form of thought is the form of
being. And that is what the sceptic doubts. Their
thought is that, in so thinking, we fail to
apprehend what is, precisely because reality does
not articulate in this way—it does not bear this
form of thought. These categories are at best
projections. And this doubt holds, not just for
these, but for all pure concepts.

\14. Is this an intelligible doubt? One might
think not; one might be tempted to say, with
McDowell, that the idea of what is just is the
idea of what is thought. Roedl himself insists
upon this very identity; as he puts it, " ‘what
is’ ... is a declarative sentence variable; its
values are what declarative sentences as such
express: thoughts" (24). But he realises that
simply affirming this identity does not address
the sceptic’s doubt. For the sceptic thinks they
have a different way of understanding the idea of
what is: as the idea of what is given through the
senses. And they doubt that what is given through
the senses bears the form of thought.

\15. We might wonder whether the sceptic needs to
understand the idea of what is in this way.
Perhaps there is a way to understand it which does
not tie it to the idea of the sensory given. We
will return to this. But the strategy of this
sceptic—the metaphysical sceptic—seems clear: to
suggest not just that the idea of what is lines up
with the idea of what is given through the senses,
but that what is so given does not bear the form
of thought—and thereby to advance the doubt that
thought is incapable of apprehending what is.

\16. It is worth dwelling on the structure of this
strategy. It seems to be as follows. First, the
sceptic introduces the idea of an "outsider" to
what we take to be our way of apprehending what
is—something which at least seems to be a
candidate for knowing the real, but which the
sceptic claims does not bear the form of "our
way". (In the present case, "our way" is thought,
and "the outsider" is sense perception.) Then—in
the second part—it advances a conception of what
is which exploits the idea of this "outsider". (In
this case, a conception according to which reality
is what is given through the senses.) And together
these two parts make room for the third part: the
doubt that reality can be apprehended in "our
way".

\17. Roedl finds a response to the present version
of metaphysical scepticism in Kant’s
Transcendental Deduction. This response does not
dispute the sceptic’s conception of reality as
what is given through the senses. It affirms that
the category is the pure concept of an object
given through the senses (cf. 38-9). What it
disputes is the first part. For it insists that
sense perception is precisely not an "outsider" to
thought: what is given through the senses itself
has a certain form, and this form is nothing other
than the form of thought.

\18. In this prospect, the ideas of what is, what
is given through the senses, and what is thought
are to become one. The form of thought is no
projection, because it just is the form of what is
given through the senses. And that just is the
form of what is. Metaphysical scepticism is
thereby cut off from the root. That, at least, is
the hope.

\19. But Roedl thinks the hope is dashed. For the
form of sensory intuition through which we take
ourselves to apprehend reality is time. And there
seems to be room for a sceptic to doubt that this
is the form of what is. It is the form of our
intuition, and so the form of thought as it
relates to our intuition. The category as it
relates to our intuition is the pure concept of an
object in time. But Kant himself makes it look as
if that is not identical to the pure concept of
what is given through the senses. He thereby makes
it look as if there is an "outsider" to this way
of apprehending reality: "a finite intellect whose
form of intuition differs from ours" (40).

\20. This version of metaphysical scepticism does
not deny that reality is what is given through the
senses. It rather exploits the idea of this
"outsider" to wonder whether reality is what is
given through the senses in this specific form.
Perhaps this form is at best a projection.

\21. The idea that thought might have time as its
form can seem unfamiliar in contemporary
philosophy. We might assume that thought relates
to time in virtue of what we think, and not in
virtue of the form in which we think it. But Roedl
maintains the contrary; elucidating the specific
unities through which this relation obtains is the
aim of the second part of his book.

\22. The present version of metaphysical
scepticism is precisely the doubt that this
form—time—is the form of what is. And, as before,
Roedl’s response is to show that there is no such
"outsider" as the sceptic claims. But whereas the
earlier response did not dispute the existence of
the mode of apprehension which was said to be an
"outsider" (namely, sense perception), merely its
"outsider" status, Roedl’s strategy is to show
that there is no possibility of "a finite
intellect whose form of intuition differs from
ours"—that the pure concept of what is given
through the senses is nothing other than the pure
concept of an object whose form is time. In this
prospect, the ideas of what is, what is given,
what is given in the form of time, and what is
thought are to become one.

\23. And this is something that Roedl seeks to
establish prior to deriving the specific forms of
thought. In this respect, his strategy is exactly
the reverse of Kant’s. Kant derives the forms of
thought in abstraction from thought’s relation to
intuition, in the so-called Metaphysical
Deduction; only then does he attempt to show how
they relate to what is given, in the
Transcendental Deduction. Roedl’s contrasting
strategy is to establish—prior to any derivation
of specific unities—that thought as thought
relates to what is given and therefore to time;
only then does he attempt to derive the unities
which make this possible.

\24. So, in Roedl’s presentation, what Kant
distinguishes as two separate deductions becomes
one. "We find the forms of thought as forms of
relating to time and therefore to intuition. We
have, by our manner of finding them, always
already vindicated their validity." (58)


 II Infinite thought

\25. I find this (enormously ambitious) conception
of thought and its relation to the real to be
almost as beautiful as the Edenic vision with
which we began. So, I do not relish the prospect
of playing the role of the serpent in this
scene—but as that seems to be the role that I am
required to play, on this occasion, I have little
choice but to raise a doubt of my own.

\26. The doubt is whether Roedl can have given us
a conception of the form of thought. This doubt
does not pertain specifically to his claim
regarding the temporal character of this form; it
arises at an earlier stage—when he grants what he
presents as Kant’s point that the form of thought
is the form of sensory intuition.

\27. This doubt arises in two ways. The first way
which I want to consider pertains to Roedl’s
handling of the idea of infinite thought—thought
which has an object, but not an object given
through the senses, and which does not therefore
have the form of sensory intuition.

\28. The mere idea of such thought seems to give
rise to metaphysical scepticism. For such thought
seems to be an "outsider" to what Roedl presents
as our way of apprehending what is—namely, finite
thought, thought whose object is given through the
senses. It thereby seems to afford a certain
conception of what is—as the object of infinite,
rather than finite, thought. And it thereby seems
to make room for the doubt that "our way" is not a
way of apprehending reality.

\29. Faced with this version of metaphysical
scepticism, one would expect Roedl’s strategy to
be the same as before: to show either that this
"outsider" does not exist, or that it is not an
"outsider" at all, because it—infinite thought—and
"our way"—finite thought—constitute a unity.
Indeed, it seems he has already committed himself
to the impossibility of such an "outsider", in his
claim that the form of thought is the form of
sensory intuition. For him to grant the
possibility of infinite thought would, it seems,
be for him to grant that the form of what is given
through the senses does not characterise "thought
as thought".

\30. However, it seems that he does grant the
possibility of this species of thought. His aim is
to show that it cannot be the measure of finite
thought. And his way of doing this is not to try
to bring the species together, but to keep them
apart. He never explicitly considers the present
version of metaphysical scepticism, but it seems
that this is how he would respond to it—for the
claim that infinite thought is the measure of
finite thought is precisely what this version
insists upon: the idea of infinite thought
provides for a certain conception of what is, and
thereby yields a standard—the apprehension of
reality—which infinite thought meets but finite
thought does not. Roedl thinks that this claim
rest on a false assumption, namely, that finite
thought constitutes a merely accidental unity:
thought, considered as such, is infinite; finite
thought is thought which relates to something
external to it (something to which its relation
can at best be accidental) namely, sensory
intuition, and, through being related to this, is
rendered finite—and therefore, according to the
claim which Roedl wants to undermine, deficient as
thought.

\31. In place of this accidentalist picture, Roedl
insists that finite thought is thought which
relates not accidentally but essentially to
sensory intuition. Rendering the unity of finite
thought essential does not dissolve the
distinction between finite thought and infinite
thought: they remain distinct species of a common
genus. But, short of the accidentalist picture,
this distinction does not amount to a normative
ordering, merely to a contrast between two
fundamentally distinct species of thought. That,
at least, is Roedl’s hope.

\32. But is this the only way to make sense of
finite thought’s deficiency as thought? Even
without the accidentalist picture, the mere
distinction between our finite species and the
infinite species, which is not ours, seems to be
enough to cast the latter in the role of
"outsider", and to render the former potentially
lacking by comparison. This suggests that there
must be a different way of making sense of finite
thought’s deficiency as thought. And there seems
to be. Could not finite thought be thought which
is both essentially finite and, by comparison to
its infinite sibling, essentially imperfect as
thought?

\33. To think of finite thought in this way is to
think of it as imperfect, not because it is
tainted by something external to its
genus—thought—but because it essentially fails to
realise its genus. The other species of its genus,
infinite thought, realises the genus, and is
therefore perfect. But finite thought does not,
and is therefore imperfect. This replaces the
accidentalist picture of finite thought and its
deficiency with a more Hegelian picture. Indeed,
it replaces it with the very Hegelian vision of
the relation between finite and infinite thought,
and consequent deficiency of the former, that
Roedl endorses in his more recent work.

\34. It is, then, not clear that the present
version of metaphysical scepticism stands or falls
with the accidentalist picture. It seems to be the
conception of infinite thought as an "outsider"
which is fundamentally responsible for this form
of scepticism. This is not a conception which
Roedl shows us how to overcome; indeed, in his
insistence on a sharp difference between what he
presents as our species of thought—the finite
species—and the infinite species, he seems rather
to enforce it. And it is not clear how to square
this attitude to the possibility of infinite
thought, which does not have the form of sensory
intuition, with his claim that the form of sensory
intuition is the form of thought.

\35. I now want to raise the present doubt,
concerning Roedl's claim to have identified the
form of thought, in a somewhat different way—not
by looking outside our thought (or at least, not
by looking at what Roedl presents as lying outside
our thought), but by going inside it.


III A residual empiricism

\36. "Kant agrees with Hume that we can apprehend
what is only by being affected by it; without
this, we cannot even think it" (41). For Kant, the
ideas of what is, and what is given through the
senses, are one. Indeed, for Kant as Roedl
presents him, and so for Roedl, the ideas of what
is, what is given through the senses, and what is
thought are one.

\37. As we have seen, this identity is central to
the response to metaphysical scepticism which
Roedl finds in the Transcendental Deduction—a
response which Roedl endorses (and seeks to take
further). But we might wonder how he can endorse
this identity. For it is a central claim of
Roedl’s—one which is explicit in his other book,
Self-Consciousness—that we enjoy a species of
thought, indeed a species of knowledge, whose
object is not given through the senses, namely,
the very knowledge which he thinks
self-consciousness is. He seems to think that it
is not true, in general, that we can know, let
alone think, what is only by being affected by it.
So, there seems to be a tension between what he
says in his other book, and what he says in the
book I am discussing here.

\38. And this tension seems to be not simply
between these two books of his; it seems to be
internal to the book I am now discussing. For, as
we have also seen, this book maintains that,
simply in thinking thoughts bearing a certain
form, one has pure knowledge that thought has this
form—that it joins thing and determination, for
example. To have this knowledge, "I need not be
affected by this or that; I only must think" (37).
But this knowledge is knowledge of what is. For
what it is knowledge of—namely, that thought has
this form—is something expressed by a declarative
sentence. And "what is" just is the variable
expression of what such sentences express. Put
differently: it is knowledge of what is, for what
it is knowledge of is something that is thought,
and the idea of what is just is the idea of what
is thought. So, by the lights of the identity
which Roedl endorses, we cannot have this
knowledge unless we are affected by what it is
knowledge of. And yet, by the lights of Roedl’s
conception of pure knowledge, it seems we can have
this knowledge without being affected by what it
is knowledge of, but simply by thinking thoughts
which bear the relevant form.

\39. The tension is clear. If the ideas of what
is, what is given through the senses, and what is
thought are one—as Roedl claims—and if pure
knowledge is knowledge that (specifically,
knowledge that thought has a certain describable
form), then pure knowledge has as its object
something given through the senses. Pure knowledge
rests on affection—contrary to what Roedl
explicitly maintains.

\40. There is no space here to claim that the
object of pure knowledge is not what is given
through the senses, but rather the form of what is
so given. For so long as pure knowledge is
knowledge that, the values of "what is" are
thoughts, and the ideas of what is and what is
given through the senses are one, its object
cannot fail to be what is thereby given.

\41. Of course, because his book rejects the view
that what is given through the senses is in itself
formless, "a matter external to thought upon which
thought may impose its form" (11), it does seem
apt for Roedl to describe his book as "a rejection
of empiricism". But in committing itself to the
claim that pure knowledge of the form of thought
rests upon affection by its object, there is a
residual empiricism at the heart of his book—and
this is the source of the present tension.

\42. What can be done to resolve this tension? It
might seem that the right response is to take the
low road of Quine and the later Wittgenstein, and
scorn the very idea of the general form of
thought. But this is not a route with which Roedl
will have any sympathy.

\43. There seem to be three possibilities open to
him, each of which requires some revision of his
initial conception.

\44. The first, and—it seems—the most revisionist
possibility is to deny that the pure knowledge in
question is knowledge that. Simply in thinking
thoughts of a certain form one does have knowledge
of the form of thought. But this knowledge cannot
be articulated or expressed; it is inexpressible,
ineffable. (This, it can seem, was the view of the
early Wittgenstein.) That would fly in the face of
Roedl’s original description of his book as
"nothing but thought reflecting upon itself,
articulating what thought as thought knows itself
to be". The self-knowledge of thought which his
book promises to articulate is the very knowledge
which this possibility declares to be incapable of
articulation.

\45. The second possibility would be to break
apart the idea of what is from the idea of what is
thought. If these ideas are equated, then thought,
considered as such, is of what is. But according
to this possibility, it is not; there can be
thoughts which are not of what is—which are, in
this sense, empty—but which are still thoughts.
(This, it can seem, is the authentically Kantian
possibility.)

\46. To endorse this possibility is, it seems, to
reject Roedl’s starting point: that thought,
considered as such, is pure knowledge. For to be
pure knowledge, thought must have an object—it
must be of what is—and so must not be empty. This
possibility seems to leave room to claim that,
simply in thinking thoughts of a certain form, one
has the thought—the consciousness—that thought has
this form. But this consciousness is not itself
knowledge, because, even though it is thought, it
does not have an object—it is not of what is.

\47. This possibility remains revisionist, from
the point of view of Roedl’s initial conception.
And the idea of empty thought which it employs is
at least not easy to understand. That leaves us
with the third possibility, with which Roedl may,
I think, be more in sympathy.

\48. This is to break apart, not the ideas of what
is and what is thought, but the ideas of what is
and what is given through the senses. That retains
Roedl’s starting point—that thought, considered as
such, is pure knowledge—but revises the conception
of the form of thought, as a relation to what is
given, which he proceeds to develop. Thought,
considered as such, is pure knowledge. And the
object of pure knowledge is not given through the
senses. So, thought, considered as such, is
infinite. Given Roedl’s own starting point, it
seems that we find infinite thought not by looking
outside but precisely by going inside our own
thought.

\49. From this perspective, any project of
articulating knowledge of the form of thought
must, it seems, not only specify the form of
infinite thought, but show how it and finite
thought—thought whose object is given through the
senses—constitute a unity; a unity in which the
former is not an "outsider", and so raises no
threat of metaphysical scepticism.

\50. This is a unity which Roedl’s book does not
enable us to understand—and which it is not yet
clear how to understand. But, given Roedl’s
starting point, it is a unity which it seems that
we must understand—if we are to understand
ourselves as the thinkers we are.

Thanks to Wolfram Gobsch, Matthias Haase, Colin
Johnston, Sasha Newton, and Peter Sullivan.

Sebastian Roedl, Categories of the Temporal: An
Inquiry into the Forms of the Finite Intellect,
translated by Sibylle Salewski (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 2012). All page
references are to this volume. Originally
published as Kategorien des Zeitlichen: Eine
Untersuchung der Formen des endlichen Verstandes
(Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 2005).

Metaphysics Г 1,1003a21.

John McDowell, Mind and World (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1994), p. 27. "Hegelian
Dialectics and Aristotle’s Stufenleiter of Life",
MS.

Self-Consciousness (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 2007).

See A. W. Moore, Points of View (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1997).
